This is the story about the death of Bairam Khan.
At the beginning of his reign, Akbar was young and inexperienced.
Thus, Bairam Khan, a close ally and companion of Humayun and who is depicted here, became Akbar's mentor, advisor, and guardian.
It was Humayun who honoured Bairam Khan with the title of Khan Khanan, meaning, "the king of kings".
Although Bairam Khan's time in power was fairly brief - that is, roughly five years, he was an essential part of the Mughal Military force.
In fact, without him, the Mughal Army would have never defeated Hemu, or reclaimed Delhi or Agra.
Bairam Khan was a great leader and commander, but as time progressed and Akbar matured, he demanded more and more autonomy.
Now, Akbar wanted to be king not only in name, but also, in reality.
Akbar's mother, Mariam Makani, was not an advocate of Bairam Khan.
She opposed many of his views and decisions, and consequently, decided to form a political alliance against him.
With strong influences from his mother, and various other disagreements...
Akbar eventually dismissed Bairam Khan, and sent him and his family on a pilgrimage to Mecca.
On his journey, he arrived at Patan, a city not far from Gujarat, and decided to stay a few days to rest and relax.
There, he would frequently go visit the beautiful gardens.
One day, he decided to go to the great pond, which had a pavilion that could be reached by boat.
In this scene, which was illustrated for Akbar by Tiriyya and Tulsi, between 1590 and 1595,
Depicts the moment of Bairam Khan's assassination.
As Bairam Khan was approaching the boat, a crowd of Afghans surrounded him,
One of them being Mubarak Khan Lohani, a man whose father had been killed in a previous battle, in which Bairam Khan was in command.
Strangely enough, it appeared that the Afghans has come to pay their respects.
So, without hesitation, Bairam Khan called to them.
As one man approached, presumably Mubarak Khan Lohani,he drew his hand in what appeared to be a salute.
Then, feulled with revenge, he struck Bairam Khan on his back with such intensity, that the dagger came out of his chest.
Years before, it was Bairam Khan that had said...
"We wish for martyrdom, but not in such a hurry".
So it may have been sooner than expected, but Bairam Khan got his wish, and had the bliss of martyrdom.
When the news made its way back to Akbar, he was devastated.
The new Punjab governor, Khan A'azim Atga Khan, was greedy and informed Akbar that Bairam Khan's death was due to treason,
and suggested that he be given the position of Khan Khanan.
Not surprisingly, Akbar refused.
Instead, as a sign of devotion and loyalty to Bairam Khan, Akbar took in his son, 'Aburrahim'.
'Abdurrahim was safely brought to the Royal Court of Akbar, where he was given the title of "Mirza Khan".
Later, he became an important part of Akbar's administration, and became one of the nine prominent ministers,
called the Navaratnas, or "nine gems".